============
OCaml primer
============

Writing a workflow with ``bistro`` requires to learn a tiny subset of
the `OCaml <http://ocaml.org>`_ language. This page aims at quickly
presenting this subset, which should be sufficient to write basic
pipelines. For the interested reader, I recommend the following
`easy
introduction <https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18212242-ocaml-from-the-very-beginning>`_
to the language and functional programming in general.


OCaml is a *functional language*, which means in brief that variables
cannot be modified. The immediate consequence of this is that ``for``
or ``while`` loops are then pretty useless and are replaced by
(possibly recursive) function calls. An OCaml program is a sequence of
expressions (like ``1 + 1``) or definitions introduced by the keyword
``let``. For instance, the program

.. code-block:: ocaml

   let a = 1 + 1

defines a variable named ``a``, which has value ``2``. This name can be
reused in subsequent definitions, like in:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   let a = 1 + 1
   let b = 2 * a

A name cannot be used if it was not defined previously. If a name is
used twice, the two definition coexist but only the last one is
visible from the subsequent definitions. Hence, in the following
program:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   let a = 1 + 1
   let b = 2 * a
   let a = 1
   let c = a

the variable ``c`` has value ``1``.

Getting started with the OCaml interpreter
==========================================

While OCaml programs can be compiled into executables, it is also very
convenient to enter programs interactively using an *interpreter*
(similar to what exists for ``python`` or ``R``). The OCaml language
has a very nice interpreter called `utop
<https://github.com/diml/utop>`__ than can easily installed using
``opam``. In a shell just type:

.. code-block:: sh

   opam install utop

and then you can call ``utop`` on the command line. An interpreter
like ``utop`` reads expressions or definitions, evaluates them and
prints the result. Expressions or definitions sent to ``utop`` should
be ended with ``;;`` (in most cases they can be ommited in OCaml
programs, but it doesn't hurt to keep them in the beginning). For
instance, let's enter a simple sentence ``let a = 1;;``. ``utop``
answers as follows:

.. code-block:: ocaml

        OCaml version 4.07.1

   # let a = 1;;
   val a : int = 1

The interpreter answers that we just defined a variable named ``a``,
of type ``int`` (the basic type for integers`` and equal to
``1``. Let's enter other definitions to meet new basic data types,
like strings:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # let s = "bistro";;
   val s : string = "bistro"

booleans:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # let b = true;;
   val b : bool = true

or floating-point numbers:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # let x = 3.14159;;
   val x : float = 3.14159

To quit the interpreter, just press ``Ctrl+D``

Functions
=========

In OCaml, functions can be defined with the ``fun`` keyword. For
instance, the expression ``fun x -> x + 1`` denotes the function that
given some integer returns the next integer. We can of course give the
function a name like for any other value:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # let f = fun x -> x + 1;;
   val f : int -> int = <fun>

Note that the interpreter "guessed" the type of ``f``, as a function
that takes an integer and returns an integer. This function can then
be called using the following syntax:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # f 41;;
   - : int = 42

In OCaml, the arguments of a function are just separated by spaces. In
general we use a simpler (but equivalent) notation to define
functions:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # let f x = x + 1;;
   val f : int -> int = <fun>

Arguments can be named, in which case they are preceded by a ``~`` at
the function definition and function calls:

.. code-block:: ocaml

   # let f ~x = x + 1;;
   val f : int -> int = <fun>
   # f ~x:0;;
   - : int = 1

Named arguments are very handy in that they can be given in any order;
also they are a very effective way to document your code. A variant of
named arguments are *optional arguments*, which may not be provided to
the function.

Last, ``bistro`` API uses so-called *polymorphic variants*, which is a
particular kind of values in OCaml. They are easy to spot because they
are written with a leading backquote, like in:

.. code-block:: ocaml

  # `mm10;;
  - : [> `mm10 ] = `mm10
  # `GB 3;;
  - : [> `GB of int ] = `GB 3

The preceding snippet shows two basic usages of the variants: in the
first one, they are used as a substitute to constant strings, the
important difference being that the OCaml compiler will spot any typo
at compile-time; the second usage is to wrap other values under a
label that reminds of the meaning of the value. Here we define a
memory requirement (3 GB), but instead of just representing it with an
integer, we wrap it with the polymorphic variant to recall that this
requirement is expressed in GB and not MB for instance.
